+++
date = '2024-12-18T00:12:11-06:00'
draft = false
title = '1984, George Orwell - Thoughts'
tags = ["filosof√≠a üë®‚Äçüë©‚Äçüë¶", "pol√≠tica üìú"]
+++

<p style="text-align: center"><i>Esta es una de mis publicaciones viejas, escrita a finales de 2021.</i></p>

> *\"Sanity is not statistical."*

---George Orwell, *1984*

## Introduction

Does *1984* even need an introduction?

The year is 1984. Three totalitarian super-states have divided the world
among themselves. Oceania, the Western super-state, includes the
war-torn city of London, home to Winston Smith. As a member of the
Ministry of Truth, he alters historical records to coincide with
whatever the Party desires. To the outside world, he is just another
obedient pawn. On the inside, however, Winston doubts. In a society
omnipresent with telescreens and the mighty Big Brother, Winston knows
he\'s doomed.

## Thoughts

A classic I have waited far too long to read, *1984* does not
disappoint. Though it presents an all-around outstanding plot, it is the
real-life context behind the novel which I find more fascinating. The
hopelessness of the war and post-war eras is clearly presented in the
general unwillingness of the characters to think deeply about complex
matters, but that does not mean Orwell meant for *1984* to be a direct
prediction of where this trajectory would lead us, much less another
cautionary tale on communism, contrary to what many took it for. After
all, Orwell himself, as a democratic socialist, was pretty left-leaning.
In reality, while the novel was in some senses inspired by the
atrocities of Stalin, its primary political focus is to discuss the
phenomenon of power. Orwell knew that what once was valid criticism
against the inequalities and atrocities of capitalism had become a cheap
tactic for politicians to prey on the misery and desperation of the
masses so as to gain popularity and, ultimately, power. Hitler did it,
Stalin did it, and Oceania does it. *1984* is merely an exaggeration of
this form of manipulation applied on a global scale and projected into
the future, meant to relate Orwell\'s concerns to the world. That, at
least in part, is a timeless message, and relates a concern we should
still be on the lookout for even today.

Unfortunately, I can\'t really talk about my favorite part of the novel
without spoiling the plot, but once you get to this part, you\'ll
realize this too: the plot doesn\'t even really matter. Even now, as
most people know at least the general details of the story of *1984*
perhaps without having read it, the book is still worth a read. The real
horror of *1984* is found in the way Orwell toys with your perception of
the inner machinations of the Party. The fact that he doesn\'t spend too
much time presenting the Party actually works in favor of *1984*, as the
lack of information preys on the reader\'s fears and ideas about how
ruthlessly totalitarian a government would have to be to reach the level
of power the Party has reached. Is the Party fallible? We may never
determine it with certainty, but a good place to start would be the
first few pages of the novel, if you know what I mean. *Al chile ni yo me acuerdo por qu√© jajajaj.*

What I can talk about, at least generally, is Winston Smith. The story
is told mostly through his own thoughts, not dialogue, which, again,
actually works in favor of the novel. The narrative style feels
remarkably intimate and personal, completely removed from the orthodoxy
of his environment and, at times, even of his own actions. I think we
can all relate to a moment in our lives in which we took a hard look at
a particular well-accepted attitude of our society, perhaps a
crowd-pleasing fad or an out-of-date tradition, and said \"This isn\'t
right,\" but decided that looking like the odd one out would be too much
of a hassle, so we just quietly acted as would be expected from us.
Winston\'s life is this moment constantly in repeat, his actions
betraying his own thoughts over and over again for the sake of safety.
This is most apparent in his conversation with his friend Syme, who
Winston recognizes is smarter than the rest and, though he never finds
direct evidence, knows about Winston\'s heterodox thoughts. It creates a
tension that makes you wonder whether or not Winston will ever become
rebellious enough to falter when dissimulating, thus making his facade
visible to the rest, including the dreaded Thought Police, a situation
perhaps allegorical to our ever more close-minded world.

*1984* has proved to be timelessly relevant. You may find the lying
\"Ministry of Truth\" and the torturous \"Ministry of Love\" silly, but
I know you know about the vulnerabilities kept secret by the \"National
Security Agency\" and the suppression at Tiananmen at the hands of the
\"People\'s Liberation Army.\" There have always been and perhaps will
always be people who will take us all for fools and try to use us to
gain and remain in power. We won\'t prevent their success by keeping our
concerns to ourselves and hoping for things to change, as Winston Smith
did. If we truly wish to live in a free society, we must realize that no
politician or public figure can save us, even those we believe most in.
We can\'t expect the government or corporations or Oceania or the
Brotherhood to place our best interests atop their priority list. In
reality, it is and will forever be only up to us to save ourselves.

## Who I recommend this to

**Readers interested in politics:** *1984* is a must read for anyone who
wishes to truly understand contemporary politics. Hopefully it\'ll also
put into perspective what real totalitarianism looks like and will
prompt you to defend yourself against it at its first sight.

**Readers interested in modern classics:** You\'ve probably read this
already if you identify with this description, but to those who
haven\'t, I trust you will not be disappointed. You will certainly get
to see a lot 20th-century influences on the story and background of
*1984*.
