+++
date = '2024-12-17T23:50:11-06:00'
draft = false
title = 'Inferno, Dante Alighieri (John Ciardi Translation) - Thoughts'
toc = false
image = 'inferno_dante.jpg'
tags = ["religión ✝️", "personal"]
+++

<p style="text-align: center"><i>Esta es una de mis publicaciones viejas, escrita a finales del 2021. Más que una crítica o reseña del poema, es un intento de vendérselo al público general. Me da un poco de cringe el estilo con el cual escribía antes, pero igual decido publicarla. Más importante, evité ahondar en el tema de la religión para hacer la publicación más acogedora para el público general, algo que nunca haría hoy.</i></p>


> *\"But the stars that marked our starting fall away. We must go deeper
> into greater pain, for it is not permitted that we stay."*

---Dante Alighieri, *Inferno*

## Introduction

Dante\'s *Divina Commedia* was written in 1320, and 700 years later its
ability to comprehensively cover all of human experience within a single
narrative remains unmatched. Drawing from the teachings of Thomas
Aquinas in his *Summa Theologiae*, Dante outlines the universe as a
sphere, one in which God is its circumference and Satan its center.
Thus, the value of any given thing can be determined simply by
establishing how close it is to the boundaries of the sphere, and how
far away it is from its center. But this model is much more than that,
and its genius lies in the fact that it is capable of covering the order
of the literal universe, Christian experience, and morality all within a
single model, outlined from the *Inferno* to the *Paradiso*. It deals
with the physical understanding of the world, since (under the Ptolemaic
system of the times) the Earth was the center of the universe, which
meant that Hell was the origin point of the universe. It deals with
Christianity, because it takes Readers through the recognition of sin
(*Inferno*), its complete rejection (*Purgatorio*), and the soul\'s
ascent to God (*Paradiso*). It deals with morality, because it explores
questions like what makes a bad man and what does it take to become a
good man. Above all, the *Commedia* is comprehensive, since it manages
to encompass so much of what it means to be human, regardless of whether
these lived in antiquity, the Middle Ages or the twenty-first century.

With this model in mind, it is the *Inferno* which presents the
universe\'s damnation and wretches, that which is closest to the center.
Too involved in terrestrial affairs and thus found guilty of *acedia*,
Dante first finds himself helpless in the Dark Wood of Error. With the
help of his guide, Virgil the poet, he must venture into the Nine
Circles of Hell to know what it truly means to sin, so that he can later
know how to reject it.

What follows is a journey that covers all faults in human behavior, and
the brilliance of the *Inferno* (and of the *Divina Commedia* as a
whole) is the fact that Dante does so by example, relating to the past,
present and future of humanity. He comments on the sins of historical
figures like Ulysses and Alexander the Great. He talks with Farinata on
the state of Florentine politics and its everlasting conflicts. He
cautions Pope Boniface VIII on the fate that awaits him and others like
him were they to continue perverting the holiness of the church. Through
the Nine Circles, each of these figures is masterfully placed according
to Dante\'s universal sphere, which itself comments on their moral
value. The *Inferno*, then, is an organization of all wrong that men do.
It is the journey of Dante, yes, but the true goal of Dante (the
narrator) is to take **you** on the same journey, so that you too can
learn to recognize and reject the wrong.

## Thoughts

The *Inferno* has been a teacher to me. Generally I think people do know
how the people of the Middle Ages lived and died, including myself, but
it wasn\'t until after the *Inferno* that I began to understand *why*
they lived the way they did. From the faint light in Dark Wood of Error
to the perversion of the Holy Trinity in the ninth and final circle of
Hell, Dante has packed the poem with all sorts of metaphors, symbols and
historical references that reveal to the modern Reader what went on
inside the heads of medieval men, including both the sharpest minds and
the average peasants\'. In essence, most people who have not read the
*Inferno* can expect to have their views on Christianity, morality,
antiquity and the Middle Ages built anew.

By categorizing sin into a set of nine descending circles, Dante draws a
critique on the darker side of morality, on what is irrefutably wrong,
even outside of Christian doctrine. It is a critique I learned a lot
from, and think many could benefit from too. Most of all, this
categorization of sin from worse to worst allows us not to learn, but to
**recognize** what we already know deep down: we are all capable of
enacting great evil, including you, me, and your average Joes and Janes.
The poem forces you to recognize all sorts of evils, sometimes those
that you yourself have not only enacted, but taken pleasure in doing so.
One must, however, attune themselves to the medieval understanding of
evil, which for them was individual and personal, not entirely
collective and based upon how harmful an action is towards others.
Gluttony, for example, often harms no one other than the perpetrator,
yet it is still an evil action. Likewise, methodical fraud is found
below incontinent violence in Hell because it involves a greater usage
of free will. Crime (the modern moral compass) involves destruction. Sin
involves first and foremost self-destruction. In the end, all evil we
enact is only ever reflected unto ourselves, and Dante makes a clear
point that this is true in both life and afterlife, not merely a matter
of divine punishment. The Law of Hell dictates that it is the sinners
who in life have **voluntarily chosen** their own eternal suffering.
Thus, as they harmed themselves in life, they harm themselves eternally
in the afterlife.

How this Law manifests itself throughout the poem is perhaps the richest
and most stimulating metaphor in the *Inferno*, especially because Dante
utilizes real or mythological figures to devise clever punishments that
reflect on the nature of the sinners\' sin. Take, for example, the
Violent Against Neighbor, found in the seventh circle of Hell. Their
torment is that they are thrown into a river of boiling blood, symbol of
the blood they spilled in the physical world. Yet not all suffer
equally, for every sinner\'s suffering is perfectly attuned to their
wretchedness. The pettier get to be only ankle deep in the river, while
the bloodthirsty like Alexander the Great drown with the blood up to
their eyelashes. Dante\'s clever punishments keep you on the edge,
curious to know how the sins of the sinners will turn on them and become
their punishment. You know now how the violent are punished, but how do
you suppose lustful have their sin reflected on them? The gluttonous?
The greedy? Your interest is piqued, isn\'t it, Reader?

Finally, while there is great value in the references to great
historical figures such as Alexander, Cleopatra and Caesar, there is
something equally charming about Dante\'s more personal references to
the characters of his Florence. Every medieval character Dante meets has
a story to tell, one that places us right in Dante\'s time and allows us
to learn more about how different the world was back then. Sometimes you
get to learn about the politics of the time, like stereotypes of the
city of Bologna being one of panderers and seducers and Lucca, of
grafters, and others you get to learn about the personal lives of its
people, like the woeful tale of Ugolino and his death, but they all
allow you to get a sense of what life was like in the then-present, of
who were the people of the Medieval Ages and what they stood (and fell)
for. The *Inferno*\'s masterful presentation of antiquity, morality and
Christianity already made it rich in substance, but these more personal
references make the poem that much better.

I know my writing could never do the *Inferno* the justice it deserves,
so while I\'m about to be more specific with whom I recommend the poem
to in a moment, I actually think anyone can benefit from reading the
*Inferno*. The past is truly an alien civilization, its wisdom is almost
completely disconnected from modern thought and is, in many ways, simply
better than it. I am of the belief that the seeds of our future are sown
in our past, and the *Inferno* is yet another reason to believe it to be
so.

## A note on Ciardi\'s translation

On Ciardi\'s translation in particular, I can vouch for its quality and
do highly recommend it, though it would be imprudent to compare it to
other translations without having read these. I will say, however, that
from the quick research I did before choosing this version, Ciardi\'s
translation appears to prioritize the poem\'s phonetics over its literal
translation when compared to others and also stands out for its notes. I
can attest to both of these facts, as though I\'m used to prose and may
have felt a bit disoriented at times, the poem\'s beauty is always
clearly front and center, and any misinterpretation is always cleared up
in the excellent notes anyways. In any case, the particular quirks
between translations aren\'t as important as it is to actually read any
version of the *Inferno* (and the *Divina Commedia*, for that matter).

## Who I recommend this to

**Readers interested in morality and religion:** It comes as no surprise
that these readers are often the first to pick up the *Inferno*. Rest
assured, this poem has a lot to teach you about zeal, morality, and
their dark counterparts, and you will undoubtedly benefit from its
wisdom.

**Readers interested in history:** There is something special about
getting to see Julius Caesar, Homer, Socrates, Cleopatra and many other
historical figures within the same narrative. History aficionados will
undoubtedly enjoy reading Dante\'s profound knowledge on the subject
throughout the pages of the *Inferno*, perhaps learning a thing or two
along the way.
