+++
date = '2024-12-18T00:39:48-06:00'
draft = false
title = 'Purgatorio, Dante Alighieri (John Ciardi Translation) - Thoughts'
tags = ["religión ✝️"]
+++

<p style="text-align: center"><i>Esta es una de mis publicaciones viejas, escrita a finales del 2021. Más que una crítica o reseña del poema, es un intento de vendérselo al público general. Me da un poco de cringe el estilo con el cual escribía antes, pero igual decido publicarla. Más importante, evité ahondar en el tema de la religión para hacer la publicación más acogedora para el público general, algo que nunca haría hoy.</i></p>

<!---
#![Purgatorio, Dante
#Alighieri](../assets/purgatorio_dante.jpg){.titleimg}
-->

> *\"Expect no more of me in word or deed: here your will is upright,
> free, and whole, and you would be in error not to heed whatever your
> own impulse prompts you to: lord of yourself I crown and mitre you."*

---Dante Alighieri, *Purgatorio*

## Introduction

Dante\'s *Divina Commedia* was written in 1320, and 700 years later its
ability to comprehensively cover all of human experience within a single
narrative remains unmatched. Drawing from the teachings of Thomas
Aquinas in his *Summa Theologiae*, Dante outlines the universe as a
sphere, one in which God is its circumference and Satan its center.
Thus, the value of any given thing can be determined simply by
establishing how close it is to the boundaries of the sphere, and how
far away it is from its center. But this model is much more than that,
and its genius lies in the fact that it is capable of covering the order
of the literal universe, Christian experience and morality all within a
single model, outlined from the *Inferno* to the *Paradiso*. It deals
with the physical understanding of the world, since (under the Ptolemaic
system of the times) the Earth was the center of the universe, which
meant that Hell was the origin point of the universe. It deals with
Christianity, because it takes Readers through the recognition of sin
(*Inferno*), its complete rejection (*Purgatorio*), and the soul\'s
ascent to God (*Paradiso*). It deals with morality, because it explores
questions like what makes a bad man and what does it take to become a
good man. Above all, the *Commedia* is comprehensive, since it manages
to encompass so much of what it means to be human, regardless of whether
these were born in antiquity, the Middle Ages, or the twenty-first
century.

As they climb the two ledges and seven cornices to reach the Earthly
Paradise, we yet again see all kinds of human faults, sometimes even on
par with what was found in the flames below, except these sinners
acknowledge, regret, and repent their mistakes, something which will
ultimately guarantee them an entrance into Paradise, no matter how
wicked their previous actions might have been. They suffer, but their
suffering stems from purification, which is temporary, not damnation,
which is eternal. Seeing all this pain, Dante (through Virgil) takes the
time to explain his theory on the nature of sin, in which he theorizes
all sin really stems from love: the Proud, Envious, and Wrathful have
corrupted their love of themselves to hate of others; the Slothful have
loved too little; and the Avaricious, Gluttonous, and Lustful have loved
immoderately. To reject sin, then, is to love truly.

The first steps are always the hardest, but as Dante distances himself
from the Earth and climbs the mountain by rejecting sin and taking in
virtue, his steps become lighter and lighter, until he finally reaches
the Earthly Paradise and prepares himself to rise towards the stars.

## Thoughts

The second part to Dante\'s great allegory does not disappoint. By now
most of the novelty has worn out and you\'re already accustomed to
Dante\'s world, style, and exposition, but they don\'t really cease to
be captivating. In the *Purgatorio*, through its characters, their
philosophy, and the very design of Purgatory, Dante yet again
demonstrates a side of pre-classical and medieval thought dearly missed
today. It presents a moral commentary on what is wrong, like the
*Inferno*, but it also emphasizes doing what is right. The Christian
roots of the poem are also more emphasized, particularly through the
virtue of the life of Mary, the Beatitudes sung by the Angels, and other
allegorical devices that urge the souls unto good. All in all, the
*Purgatorio* accomplishes its goal of being a bridge between the
depravity of the *Inferno* and the beauty of the *Paradiso*.

The main dynamic here is similar to what is seen in the *Inferno*: the
sinners suffer a punishment that relates to their sin. However, in the
*Inferno* the punishment directly reflected the sin, whereas in the
*Purgatorio* the punishment reverses the sin. For example, in the
*Inferno* the Lustful were punished by being violently whirled through
the air, symbolizing how they followed their impulses on a whim. In the
*Purgatorio* though, their impulses are symbolized by burning flames,
and they achieve penance by learning to stand calmly in them. Likewise,
the filthy marshes of the Styx hindered the Slothful\'s movement in the
*Inferno*, but here, they run around the cornice so vigorously that they
won\'t even stop to speak to Dante. You must remember Dante has given
symbolic meaning to nearly everything in the *Divina Commedia*, and
these punishments are certainly no coincidence.

The *Purgatorio* also presents the dynamic of the whip and the rein. As
he climbs each cornice to meet the sinners, Dante is presented first
with a whip that urges the sinners unto emulation of virtue and then
with a reign that deters them from their sin, both symbolizing the same
tools utilized to control the behavior of a horse, respectively. These
devices, though presented in various forms, consist of historical
examples of great human virtue and fault particular to the sin of the
cornice on which the Poets find themselves, and the first examples of
great virtue always come from the life of Mary. For example, when the
Poets reach the first cornice, that of the Proud, they are presented
with three bas-reliefs carved in the perfect marble of the mountain\'s
inner cliff, the first of which depicts Mary\'s humble reaction upon the
Annunciation. After meeting the Proud and discovering their punishment,
Dante notices that the floor is carved with *thirteen* examples of
destruction through pride, notable among these the tale of Arachne and
of Nimrod and his Tower of Babel. It is these devices which most
distinguish the *Purgatorio* from the *Inferno*. Hell is a destination
meant only to reflect the pain its inhabitants caused, but Purgatory is
instead a transitory phase, meant to teach and prepare the souls for
salvation.

A pleasant surprise within the *Purgatorio* is the fact that it contains
many medieval scientific, philosophical, and metaphysical theories, and
though at times they proved hard to follow to my modern mind, they were
exceptionally insightful. The most important of these is Virgil\'s
discourse on love, which as mentioned before is central to Dante\'s
understanding of sin. However, there are many other tangential
discourses that, though they aren\'t as crucial to the story and some
are even scientifically irrelevant today, they are still quite
thought-provoking. These are unfortunately too long to properly discuss
here, but as a quick overview, the Poets discuss anything from the
metaphysical faults of Averroism and Epicureanism to
Aristotelian/Aquinian ideas on conception and the birth of the human
soul. They greatly enrich the *Purgatorio*\'s historic and cultural
content and yet again demonstrate how, perhaps contrary to popular
belief, the ancients and medievals weren\'t all ignorant and backwards.

## A note on Ciardi\'s translation

The *Purgatorio* proved to be a more difficult read than I had
anticipated. It isn\'t incomprehensible by any means, but you do have to
pay extra attention to ensure that you don\'t miss out on any of
Dante\'s fine-carved details. The way in which the Poets utilize the
stars relative to the southern hemisphere of the world to describe
almost the exact hour of the day was particularly hard to grasp. Were it
not for the help of Ciardi, I certainly wouldn\'t have understood these
and other complexities presented in the canticle. Though I haven\'t
checked out the other translations, I can definitely vouch for this one.
Both it\'s notes and presentation are clear enough, but as with the
*Inferno*, the tone of the poem takes precedence, something I\'m
personally fine with.

## Who I recommend this to

**Readers interested in morality:** The *Purgatorio* will yet again
enlighten those who are deeply interested in virtue. The whip is a most
useful compilation of great virtue from all periods of history, and many
other devices in the *Purgatorio* also work as a commentary on virtue. I
invite you to ponder why Dante chose to place the suicide Cato as the
protector of Purgatory, yet Pierre delle Vigne suffers in the seventh
circle of Hell.

**Readers interested in Christianity:** As stated, the Christian
influence is more clear in this canticle as opposed to the previous one.
The *Purgatorio* has all sorts of metaphors and references that allude
to Christianity (specifically Roman Catholicism, obviously) and the
history of the Church, from the color of the three steps taken at the
entrance of Purgatory to the Triumphal Chariot and the Heavenly Pageant.
